add page with instructions for reloading a segment (#230)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/data-import/segment-upload.md

---
description: Upload a table segment in Apache Pinot.
---

# Upload a table segment from an external source

> This procedure uploads one or more table segments that have been stored as Pinot segment binary files outside of Apache Pinot, such as if you had to close an original Pinot cluster and create a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upload one or more table segments from external Pinot segment binary files. This may be useful if you close a Pinot cluster, create a new cluster, and want to upload segments from the closed cluster to your new cluster.
```

Reviewer: is closed the right term here? 
would folks need to save the segment binary files somehow before closing the cluster to have access to upload them?

Author: The genesis for this page comes from a forum user (thread: https://startreecommunity.slack.com/archives/C023ZHPRHR9/p1692878831162759) who used "closed". I've heard it before. The entire process assumes the data was saved (automatically) when the stored segments were created by the Pinot instance before it was closed out, so there's nothing really to say about "be sure to save". This is kind of like "our Pinot server had a catastrophic crash" or "we had a failed software upgrade" and either way start from scratch. Luckily the data was already saved in the deep store.

> In this case, your data would not be in your new cluster and the source wouldn't be configured in your [table configuration](../../configuration-reference/table.md).

Reviewer: curious what this means? are there cases where data would be in your new cluster and configured in table config?

if not, I think this goes w/o saying?

Author: yeah, it probably goes without saying. :)

> You have two options. Use the Pinot Admin script if your data is on a host where you have SSH access. You can use the Pinot Controller API for the same use case and also when data is on an external host, such as Amazon S3.

Reviewer: Do one of the following:
- If your data is on a host where you have SSH access, use the Pinot Admin script or the Pinot Controller API.
- If you data is on an external host, such as an Amazon S3 bucket, use the Pinot Controller API.

> Before you upload, you must first check or do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you upload, do the following:
```

> 1. [Create a schema configuration](../../basics/getting-started/pushing-your-data-to-pinot#creating-a-schema) or confirm one exists that matches the segment you will upload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Create a schema configuration](../../basics/getting-started/pushing-your-data-to-pinot#creating-a-schema) or confirm one exists that matches the segment you want to upload.
```

> 1. [Create a table configuration](../../configuration-reference/table.md) or confirm one exists that matches the segment you will upload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Create a table configuration](../../configuration-reference/table.md) or confirm one exists that matches the segment you want to upload.
```

> 1. (If needed) Upload the schema and table configs.

Reviewer: how to do this?

Reviewer: is this the same step?:

To upload the schema and table configuration, do one of the following:

- If your data is on a host where you have SSH access, use the Pinot Admin script or the Pinot Controller API.
- If you data is on an external host, such as an Amazon S3 bucket, use the Pinot Controller API.

Author: To get Pinot running, they already have to know how to upload a schema and table config, but it's not a bad idea to see if I can find a link to the doc page where this process is described should a reminder be needed.

This is a different step from uploading segments that are stored elsewhere. Terminology is confusing and unraveling it is taking time. Future docs ideas are plentiful!

Author: TODO: create a single page describing how to upload a table config and another page for how to upload schema. Currently this info is included in multiple example/quickstart type pages, but there's no single source of truth for the info.

## Use the Pinot Admin script to upload segments

> Upload segment files to your Pinot server from controller using the Pinot Admin script as follows:

Reviewer: is controller what we referred to earlier as the deep store location?

Author: no

```bash
pinot-admin.sh UploadSegment -controllerHost localhost -controllerPort 9000 -segmentDir /path/to/local/dir -tableName myTable
```

> All the options should be prefixed with `-` (hyphen)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All options should be prefixed with `-` (hyphen)
```

| Option         | Description                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------- |

> | controllerHost | hostname or ip of the controller          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| controllerHost | Hostname or IP address of the controller          |
```

> | controllerPort | port of the controller                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| controllerPort | Port of the controller                    |
```

> | segmentDir     | local directory containing segment files  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| segmentDir     | Local directory containing segment files  |
```

> | tableName      | name of the table to push the segments in |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| tableName      | Name of the table to push the segments into |
```

## Use the Pinot Controller API to upload segments

> There are two API call versions. Use the one that corresponds to your installed version of the Pinot query engine.

Reviewer: how can I find what version of the Pinot query engine I have?

Author: great question! it took me a long time to figure this out, but it's in there now!

The parameters for both versions are the same, as follows:

| Parameter Name | Description                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------- |

> | body                           | model, see example |
> | tableName                      | name of the table  |
> | tableType                      | type of the table  |
> | enableParallelPushProtection   | Whether to enable parallel push protection (true/false) |
> | allowRefresh                   | Whether to refresh if the segment already exists  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| body                           | Model, see example |
| tableName                      | Name of the table  |
| tableType                      | Type of the table  |
| enableParallelPushProtection   | If true, enables parallel push protection; false otherwise. |
| allowRefresh                   | If true, refreshes the existing segment; false otherwise.  |
```

### v1

> Upload a segment files to your Pinot server using the Pinot Controller API and the original API call as follows:

Reviewer: a segment file?

Author: Segments are stored as single binary files, one for each segment. Took me too long to figure that out/learn it.

---
description: Upload a table segment in Apache Pinot.
---

# Upload a table segment from an external source

This procedure uploads one or more table segments that have been stored as Pinot segment binary files outside of Apache Pinot, such as if you had to close an original Pinot cluster and create a new one.

Choose one of the following:

* If your data is in a location that uses HDFS, create a segment fetcher.

> * If your data is on a host where you have SSH access, use the Pinot Admin script.

Reviewer 2: is "admin" really a proper noun here?

Author: The script seems to be called "Pinot Admin".

The push job will upload the entire segment tar file to the Pinot controller.

The Pinot controller will save the segment into the controller segment directory (Local or any PinotFS), then extract segment metadata, and add the segment to the table.

While you can create a `JobSpec` for this job, in simple instances you can push without one.

Upload segment files to your Pinot server from controller using the Pinot Admin script as follows:

```bash
pinot-admin.sh UploadSegment -controllerHost localhost -controllerPort 9000 -segmentDir /path/to/local/dir -tableName myTable
```

All options should be prefixed with `-` (hyphen)

| Option         | Description                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| controllerHost | Hostname or IP address of the controller  |
| controllerPort | Port of the controller                    |
| segmentDir     | Local directory containing segment files  |
| tableName      | Name of the table to push the segments into |

### Segment URI push

This push mechanism requires the segment tar file stored on a deep store with a globally accessible segment tar URI.

> URI push is light-weight on the client-side, and the controller side requires equivalent work as the tar push.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
URI push is lightweight on the client side, and the controller side requires equivalent work as the tar push.
```

> The push job will POST this segment tar URI to the Pinot controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The push job posts this segment tar URI to the Pinot controller.
```

> The Pinot controller will save the segment into the controller segment directory (Local or any PinotFS), then extract segment metadata, and add the segment to the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Pinot controller saves the segment into the controller segment directory (local or any PinotFS), then extracts segment metadata, and adds the segment to the table.
```

Upload segment files to your Pinot server using the `JobSpec` you create and the Pinot Admin script as follows:

```bash
pinot-admin.sh LaunchDataIngestionJob \\
    -jobSpecFile /file/location/my-job-spec.yaml
```

### Segment metadata push

This push mechanism also requires the segment tar file stored on a deep store with a globally accessible segment tar URI.

> Metadata push is light-weight on the controller side, there is no deep store download involved from the controller side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata push is lightweight on the controller side. There is no deep store download involved.
```

> The push job will download the segment based on URI, then extract metadata, and upload metadata to the Pinot Controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The push job downloads the segment based on URI, then extracts metadata, and upload metadata to the Pinot Controller.
```

> The Pinot Controller will add the segment to the table based on the metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Pinot controller adds the segment to the table based on the metadata.
```
